---
title: "High-impact chronic pain in sickle cell disease: insights from the Pain in Sickle Cell Epidemiology Study (PiSCES)"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-hicp
excerpt: 'In this study, we leveraged data previously collected in the landmark PiSCES study to examine the HICP phenotype in SCD. We proposed to compare the pain phenotype and outcomes between those with a HICP-like phenotype, hereafter referred to as the HICP group, with those who had CP but did not have HICP, hereafter referred to as the No-HICP group. We also examined the association between HRQoL outcomes and HICP status.'
date: 2024-10-01
venue: 'PAIN'
paperurl: 'https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38787626/'
---

The US National Pain Strategy recommends identifying individuals with chronic pain (CP) who experience substantial restriction in work, social, or self-care activities as having high-impact chronic pain (HICP). High-impact chronic pain has not been examined among individuals with CP and sickle cell disease (SCD). We analyzed data from 63 individuals with SCD and CP who completed at least 5 months of pain diaries in the Pain in Sickle Cell Epidemiology Study (PiSCES). Forty-eight individuals met the definition for HICP, which was operationalized in this study as reporting pain interference on more than half of diary days. Compared with individuals without HICP, individuals with HICP experienced higher mean daily pain intensity, particularly on days without crises. They also experienced a greater proportion of days with pain, days with healthcare utilization, and days with home opioid use and higher levels of stress. They did not have a statistically significantly higher proportion of days with crises or experience higher mean daily pain intensity on days with crises. Individuals with HICP experienced worse physical functioning and worse physical health compared with those without HICP, controlling for mean pain intensity, age, sex, and education. The results of this study support that HICP is a severely affected subgroup of those with CP in SCD and is associated with greater pain burden and worse health outcomes. The findings from this study should be confirmed prospectively in a contemporary cohort of individuals with SCD.
